---
layout: default.njk
title: Preliminary Biological Resources Assessment - 2024
---

# Preliminary Biological Resources Assessment

A [Preliminary Biological Resources Assessment memorandum](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1H1DfPC095PwwITk49ePJA4OBP0FHdbks/view?usp=drive_link) was published on August 27, 2024 by [Environmental Science Associates](https://esassoc.com/). This preliminary assessment was based on a review of existing documents and a "reconnaissance-level survey of the project area on June 6, 2024".

## Clarifications and Corrections

p. 4 - "A sand and gravel spit along the east edge of the North Basin includes limited areas of non-native, invasive smooth cordgrass (_Spartina alterniflora_)". This has been identified as native cordgrass - [see details](../../plants/cordgrass/).

p. 4 - "The western edge of North Basin Strip between the path and escarpment ... includes some non-native cultivars". There do not appear to be cultivars in this location except possibly _Oenothera_ (see below). There are a few plants which may be considered non-native as they are California natives not likely to occur naturally in nearby habitat. Specific detail on what are considered non-native cultivars would be helpful.

p. 4 - "including the very common, non-native yellow-faced bumble bee (_Bombus vosnesenskii_)". This species seems to generally be considered a local native, so either a correction or information about why it is considered non-native should be supplied.

p. 5 - _Brassica nigra_ does not appear to be present in the project area.

p. 5 - The _Diplacus_ in the project area is likely all _Diplacus aurantiacus_, a species native to the East Bay, planted since 2015 and occasionally reseeding from these plantings. _Diplacus longiflorus_ does not appear to be present in the project area.

p. 31 - "up to about 6-7 ft high above the toe". There do not appear to be any locations where the scarp is higher than 5 feet. Heights of 4 to 5 feet are common.

p. 32, photo 4 caption - "two patches of hybrid cordgrass occupies this zone, otherwise colonized only by saltgrass and sea-lettuce". The cordgrass is native (see the [cordgrass page](../../plants/cordgrass) for details). _Grindelia stricta_ and _Salicornia pacifica_ are commonly found in this zone as well as saltgrass.

p. 36 - "The same local soils and topography that support robust native sod-forming _L. triticoides_ stands also support invasive Harding grass meadows (_Phalaris aquatica_), even in adjacent monodominant stands separated only by the east shore trail (Figure 11)". The _L. triticoides_ in photo (a) and the left side of photo (b) contained significant amounts of Harding grass as of 2018. Since then, it has been gradually reduced by volunteers, but as of June 2025 some still remains.

p. 36 - "A subset of the local invasive non-native flora is assessed below". See the [Invasive Plants](../../plants/non_native) page for a list of common invasives as of June 2025.

p. 37 - _Oenothera glazioviana_ - Oenothera has been present in one small area since at least 2012. The plants are short-lived and their numbers have remained fairly constant since 2012. If these plants are determined to be _Oenothera glazioviana_ rather than the similar [_Oenothera elata_ subsp. _hookeri_](https://rareplants.ebcnps.org/Oenothera-elata-subsp-hookeri.html) (uncommon in the East Bay) they should be fairly easy to eliminate.

p. 37 - "Hybrid San Francisco Bay cordgrass, _Spartina foliosa_ x _alterniflora_". This is native cordrass; see the [cordgrass page](../../plants/cordgrass) for details.

p. 38 - "the most invasive Mediterranean sea-lavender species established in San Francisco Bay (_L. ramosissiumum_, _L. duriusculum_) were not detected along any of the shorelines or marshes around North Basin". _L. ramosissiumum_ is present in the project area; see the [Invasive Plants](../../plants/non_native#lira) page for details.
